Let's come back to that
concept of immutability.
That has come up several times today
where we said that immutability and
immutable data really go hand in
hand with functional programming.
And we saw that changing things especially
changing things out in the world feels not
functional feels pretty side effect.
Feels pretty not pure.
So let's take a look at how we can
think about immutability when we
are doing functional programming and
particularly in JavaScript.
So in general, mutability causes a lot of
headaches, whether you're doing functional
programming, whether you've been doing
sort of pseudo functional programming or
whether you are sticking to plain
old object oriented JavaScript.
Mutating value, so changing values
in place, like changing the elements
in an array in place, or
changing the elements in a in an object,
the values in an object in place
can lead to a lot of headaches.
Because you have to really think hard
about What somebody might have done
to change your object out from under you.
So in functional programming, and remember
the aim of using functional programming
is to make us happier and more productive
programmers because we have less bugs.
We have easier tests etcetera.
What we're gonna do is we're
gonna avoid mutability.
We're gonna avoid mutating data or
changing data in place.
And instead we're going to replace
any data that we want to update
with a new slightly modified version.
So let's take a look.
Okay, here I've got an array
of some city names,
which are a little bit out of date.
For example, the city called
Mumbai is no longer called Bombay.
So maybe I have this array of cities and
I want to replace that middle value.
So I use regular old JavaScript.
The first index in the array,
I'm going to assign a new value.
And now cities is different.
Okay, so that worked for me because
I'm trying to work with the CRA but
maybe meanwhile, my coworker over there
she's working with this cities array 2 and
she wasn't expecting any
of the data to change.
Maybe I changed it wrong.
Maybe I put an undefined value in there or
maybe I put a number in there or
did something that broke the assumptions
that she was making about
working with the cities array.
And she has no way of knowing that so
you have to check for
everything if to check for
all of those edge cases, right?
Otherwise I am going to break her code
because she was not expecting me to change
that cities array out from under her.
So a safer way to do this is if I
have this array of old cities is
instead of mutating it and
changing that value in place,
I'm going to create a new cities array,
which I can use this map operation.
And here I'm using the built
in JavaScriptarray.mapsyntax,
instead of our little map helper function,
but
you could totally do this with
the more functional style map helper.
That we saw how to use
plenty of times earlier.
So what I'm gonna do is using a map,
I'm gonna go through
everything in this city's array and
check if it needs to be updated or not.
And that map, as we said before,
that map operation returns a new array,
it doesn't change the array in place.
So now new cities is a totally different
array with different values with some
updated names.
But my old cities array
has not been changed.
So my coworker she was working
with that old cities array and
making assumptions about what
types of data would be in it, or
what shape that data would
be things like that.
I haven't missed any of that up.
She is still working with the same data
she was always working with, but I now
have my new cities array that I can use in
my code to do whatever I'm trying to do.
So the idea is that avoiding mutation and
creating new copies with those slight
differences instead of using the same copy
and changing it in place is much safer.
And also allows us to read more
of that determinant, excuse me,
for that more deterministic code.
So that we know what is gonna happen
because we're confident that no one has
changed the data that we're working with.
Now you might be wondering mm-hm what
if those arrays are really long?
Or what have you have to make lots of
updates to them does not mean that you're
gonna have to make more and more and
more and more and more long arrays.
And isn't that gonna get kinda heavy and
kinda not so performant or
we gonna start using a lot of memory and
also we have to take the time to
copy all of that stuff every time.
What's the deal there?
And it's true copying data this way,
instead of changing it in
place is not super efficient.
We have a lot of work to do, and
that takes time and it takes space.
So that is a challenge for
functional programming if I want
all of my data to be immutable,
if I want to always be returning new
copies, Instead of changing things.
How can I do that in a way that's not
going to immediately blow up my computer
from maxing out memory or
just take forever because I have to
go through every array every time.
So there is a solution to this in
the functional programming world which
is special types of data structures
that are designed to be immutable,
but also efficient.
And these are called
immutable data structures, or
sometimes persistent data structures.
Those are actually two slightly
different terms but they're often used
interchangeably, so we're not gonna
get into the subtle differences here.
Use something called structural sharing.
Immutable data structures
allow us to represent
our data in a kind of tree like structure.
So that we can reuse unchanged
parts of the tree while
changing the parts that we wanna update.
Now, we're not gonna go into
a ton of detail on this today.
But suffice it to say that
the core idea is this.
Let's say I have some array called
Zoo with a bunch of Zoo animals,
little emojis and I want to update that.
I want to instead of my little
bunny rabbit here at index 1,
I wanna have an alien, I'm getting
a really exotic alien animal in my Zoo.
Instead of mutating that in place,
which again, could mess up, I don't know.
Maybe my Zoo keeper colleague over there
is not expecting extra terrestrial animals
and their code only works with
terrestrial animals maybe.
So instead of changing that in place,
what I can do is take my
original Zoo array,
break it up into this tree like structure,
where now instead of an array,
I've got kind of a tree of all my data.
And now what I can do
is copy only the nodes
of the tree that I need to change to
replace that value at index 1.
So before I had my array represented with
these little notes, a little pairs of
buddies of animals, which are then joined
by these kind of intermediary nodes.
And then finally I get sort of a root node
that I can point to in my Zoo variable so
that I can unite all of those animals.
What I'm going to do is keep all of
the nodes that I don't need to change and
create new a new node for
any new values that I need.
So in this case,
I'm copying a little two item array,
which is way better than
copying an eight item array.
And then add some intermediate
nodes that link that that new
node up with the old ones
that I have not changed.
So what I've got here,
is this yellow part of the tree here,
gets to be shared by both versions.
So what happens, is that I get to
create new copies of my array,
which is now a tree under the hood
without copying everything in the array.
And we're not gonna go into ton
of detail about how this works or
how it's more efficient but
I'm gonna leave you with some more
resources later to read up on that.
And a talk of mine you can watch also,
to find out more about that.
Suffice it to say,
this really helps functional programmers,
because we get to work with immutable data
but still not have to copy everything
every single time which would be super
slow and would require tons of space.